notif ios: Handle opening of conversation on tap; take 2 (#1379)
zulip/zulip-flutter: docs/howto/push-notifications-ios-simulator.md

# Testing Push Notifications on iOS Simulator

For documentation on testing push notifications on Android or a real
iOS Device, see https://github.com/zulip/zulip-mobile/blob/main/docs/howto/push-notifications.md

This doc describes how to test client side changes on iOS Simulator.
It will demonstrate how to use APNs payloads the server sends to
Apple's Push Notification service to show notifications on iOS
Simulator.

## 1. Setup dev server

[Follow the steps in this section to setup a development server, and

> register the development server to the production bouncer](https://github.com/zulip/zulip-mobile/blob/main/docs/howto/push-notifications.md#server).

Author: It looks like after the commit https://github.com/zulip/zulip/commit/4a9314943525ad001c46a8ab44a0ca42e26bbb80 there is no need to do the push notifications registration manually, just running the dev server should work fine. Tested with fresh dev environment and verified that it works.

> register the development server to the production bouncer](https://github.com/zulip/zulip-mobile/blob/main/docs/howto/push-notifications.md#server).

Reviewer: Huh interesting. That is a bit puzzling, though — looking at the `dev_settings.py` in that commit, it seems like it'll end up trying to talk to the bouncer at `http://push.zulipdev.com:9991` (exactly like the signup command was doing when I tried above), or at an even more unlikely URL like `http://push.192.168.0.101:9991` when one sets EXTERNAL_HOST to enable one's phone to get to the server.

> register the development server to the production bouncer](https://github.com/zulip/zulip-mobile/blob/main/docs/howto/push-notifications.md#server).

Reviewer: Started a chat thread to debug in more detail: [#mobile-team > notifications from dev server @ 💬](https://chat.zulip.org/#narrow/channel/243-mobile-team/topic/notifications.20from.20dev.20server/near/2159855)

     )
     logger.info("Sending push notifications to mobile clients for user %s", user_profile_id)
+    logger.info("APNS payload %s", orjson.dumps(apns_payload))

     android_devices = list(
         PushDeviceToken.objects.filter(user=user_profile, kind=PushDeviceToken.FCM).order_by("id")
```

## 5. (Optional) Send messages to the dev user

To generate notifications to the dev user `iago@zulip.com` we need to
send messages from another user. For a variety of different types of
payloads try sending a message in a topic, a message in a group DM,
and one in one-one DM. Then look for the payloads in the server logs
by searching for "APNS payload".

The logged payload JSON will have different structure than what an
iOS device actually receives, to fix that, run the payload through
the following command:

```shell-session
$ echo '{"alert":{"title": ...' | jq '{aps: {alert: .alert, sound: .sound, badge: .badge}, zulip: .custom.zulip}'
```

## 6. Push APNs payload to iOS Simulator

_If you skipped steps 2-5, you'll need pre-forged APNs payloads for
existing messages in a default development server messages for the

> user `iago@zulip.com`:_

Reviewer: These worked great for me (because I haven't gotten the dev server working with the bouncer — see question above), with one change:

I replaced the string `localhost` throughout with the IP address my dev server was using in its EXTERNAL_HOST, per the instructions at https://github.com/zulip/zulip-mobile/blob/main/docs/howto/dev-server.md .

(If my dev server were located on the Mac where the simulator is running, then `localhost` would work fine, as per https://github.com/zulip/zulip-mobile/blob/main/docs/howto/dev-server.md#ios-simulator-macos-only . But instead I have it running on a different machine, my Linux desktop, so it needs to use the address of that machine.)

For me that looked like:
`$ perl -i -0pe s/localhost/192.168.0.113/g tmp/*.json`
to make the strings say `"http://192.168.0.113:9991"` instead of `"http://localhost:9991"`.

Reviewer: bump — I'd like this information to not get lost for the next person.

Here's a version that could go in verbatim:
> These canned payloads assume that EXTERNAL_HOST has its default value for the dev server. If you've [set EXTERNAL_HOST to use an IP address](https://github.com/zulip/zulip-mobile/blob/main/docs/howto/dev-server.md#4-set-external_host) in order to enable your device to connect to the dev server, you'll need to adjust the `realm_url` fields. You can do this by a find-and-replace for `localhost`; for example, `perl -i -0pe s/localhost/10.0.2.2/g tmp/*.json` after saving the canned payloads to files `tmp/*.json`.

# Testing Push Notifications on iOS Simulator

For documentation on testing push notifications on Android or a real
iOS Device, see https://github.com/zulip/zulip-mobile/blob/main/docs/howto/push-notifications.md

This doc describes how to test client side changes on iOS Simulator.
It will demonstrate how to use APNs payloads the server sends to
Apple's Push Notification service to show notifications on iOS
Simulator.

> ## 1.(Optional) Setup dev server

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
## 1. (Optional) Setup dev server
```

_Skip to step 6 in which you will use canned notification payloads,
these intermediate steps records how to get those payloads, which may
be useful in future._

> Setup and run Zulip dev server following the [setup tutorial](https://zulip.readthedocs.io/en/latest/development/setup-recommended.html).

Reviewer: I think this isn't enough on its own — for getting one's phone to be able to talk to the dev server you'll want the instructions at https://github.com/zulip/zulip-mobile/blob/main/docs/howto/dev-server.md (per https://github.com/zulip/zulip-flutter/pull/1379#discussion_r2023621262).

Author: I had changed to that link because these instructions were specific to testing on iOS Simulator, and expectation was to do these intermediate (optional) steps on the Simulator too.

Changed back to this link, in case reader tries these steps on an actual device, or in your case where server is running on a different machine than the Mac.

Reviewer: Ah true, the doc does say it's about the simulator. And the key `xcrun simctl push` step at the end sure sounds like it'll only work on the simulator.

It's probably not real common to be running the dev server on a different machine from the Mac hosting the simulator. So it'd be reasonable to add a remark here saying that if you'll be running the dev server on the Mac that's also hosting the simulator, then those steps boil down to just the normal Zulip dev server instructions (and include a direct link to the latter).

## 2. (Optional) Setup the dev user to receive mobile notifications.

We'll use the devlogin user `iago@zulip.com` to test notifications,
log in to that user by going to `/devlogin` on that server on Web.

And then follow the steps [here](https://zulip.com/help/mobile-notifications)
to enable Mobile Notifications for "Channels".

## 3. (Optional) Login to the dev user on zulip-flutter.

> <!-- TODO(405) Guide to use the new devlogin page instead -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- TODO(#405) Guide to use the new devlogin page instead -->
```

That's the convention we use for TODO links to issues. See existing examples:
```
$ git grep -P 'TODO.\d+'
$ git grep -P 'TODO.#\d+'
```

Keeping the convention consistent helps keep the references greppable.

+    logger.info("APNS payload %s", orjson.dumps(apns_payload))

     android_devices = list(
         PushDeviceToken.objects.filter(user=user_profile, kind=PushDeviceToken.FCM).order_by("id")
```

## 5. (Optional) Send messages to the dev user

To generate notifications to the dev user `iago@zulip.com` we need to
send messages from another user. For a variety of different types of
payloads try sending a message in a topic, a message in a group DM,
and one in one-one DM. Then look for the payloads in the server logs
by searching for "APNS payload".

The logged payload JSON will have different structure than what an
iOS device actually receives, to fix that, run the payload through
the following command:

```shell-session
$ echo '{"alert":{"title": ...' | jq '{aps: {alert: .alert, sound: .sound, badge: .badge}, zulip: .custom.zulip}'
```

## 6. Push APNs payload to iOS Simulator

_If you skipped steps 2-5, you'll need pre-forged APNs payloads for
existing messages in a default development server messages for the
user `iago@zulip.com`:_

The canned payloads were generated from Zulip Server 11.0-dev+git

> 8fd04b0f, API Feature Level 377, in April 2025.

Reviewer: That's a version from this week, after you originally wrote this doc — did you confirm that it still produces the same output?

Reviewer: Great, thanks!

+    logger.info("APNS payload %s", orjson.dumps(apns_payload))

     android_devices = list(
         PushDeviceToken.objects.filter(user=user_profile, kind=PushDeviceToken.FCM).order_by("id")
```

## 5. (Optional) Send messages to the dev user

To generate notifications to the dev user `iago@zulip.com` we need to
send messages from another user. For a variety of different types of
payloads try sending a message in a topic, a message in a group DM,
and one in one-one DM. Then look for the payloads in the server logs
by searching for "APNS payload".

The logged payload JSON will have different structure than what an
iOS device actually receives, to fix that, run the payload through
the following command:

```shell-session
$ echo '{"alert":{"title": ...' | jq '{aps: {alert: .alert, sound: .sound, badge: .badge}, zulip: .custom.zulip}'
```

## 6. Push APNs payload to iOS Simulator

_If you skipped steps 2-5, you'll need pre-forged APNs payloads for
existing messages in a default development server messages for the
user `iago@zulip.com`:_

These canned payloads were generated from Zulip Server 11.0-dev+git

> 8fd04b0f0, API Feature Level 377, in April 2025.

Reviewer: ah, thanks for adding the 9th digit here :-)

# Testing Push Notifications on iOS Simulator

For documentation on testing push notifications on Android or a real
iOS Device, see https://github.com/zulip/zulip-mobile/blob/main/docs/howto/push-notifications.md

This doc describes how to test client side changes on iOS Simulator.
It will demonstrate how to use APNs payloads the server sends to
Apple's Push Notification service to show notifications on iOS
Simulator.

> ## 1. (Optional) Setup dev server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 1. (Optional) Set up dev server
```

"setup" is a noun, "set up" the verb

_Skip to step 6 in which you will use canned notification payloads,
these intermediate steps records how to get those payloads, which may
be useful in future._

Follow
[this setup tutorial](https://zulip.readthedocs.io/en/latest/development/setup-recommended.html)
to setup and run the dev server on same the Mac machine that hosts
the iOS Simulator.

If you want to run the dev server on a different machine than the Mac
host, you'll need to follow extra steps
[documented here](https://github.com/zulip/zulip-mobile/blob/main/docs/howto/dev-server.md)
to make it possible for the app running on the iOS Simulator to
connect to the dev server.

## 2. (Optional) Setup the dev user to receive mobile notifications.

We'll use the devlogin user `iago@zulip.com` to test notifications,
log in to that user by going to `/devlogin` on that server on Web.

And then follow the steps [here](https://zulip.com/help/mobile-notifications)
to enable Mobile Notifications for "Channels".

> ## 3. (Optional) Login to the dev user on zulip-flutter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 3. (Optional) Log in as the dev user on zulip-flutter.
```

Similarly "login" is a noun, "log in" the verb.

And as a smaller point: one logs in "to" a server, a realm, or even an account, but logs in "as" a user. The user isn't a space one is entering, but an identity one is taking on.

To login to this user in the Flutter app, you'll need the password
that was generated by the development server. You can print the
password by running this command inside your `vagrant ssh` shell:
```
$ ./manage.py print_initial_password iago@zulip.com
```

Then run the app on the iOS Simulator, accept the permission to
receive push notifications, and then login to the dev user
(`iago@zulip.com`).

## 4. (Optional) Edit the server code to log the notification payload.

We need to retrieve the APNs payload the server generates and sends
to the bouncer. To do that we can add a log statement after the
server completes generating the APNs in `zerver/lib/push_notifications.py`:

```diff
     apns_payload = get_message_payload_apns(
         user_profile,
         message,
         trigger,
         mentioned_user_group_id,
         mentioned_user_group_name,
         can_access_sender,
     )
     gcm_payload, gcm_options = get_message_payload_gcm(
         user_profile, message, mentioned_user_group_id, mentioned_user_group_name, can_access_sender
     )
     logger.info("Sending push notifications to mobile clients for user %s", user_profile_id)

> +    logger.info("APNS payload %s", orjson.dumps(apns_payload))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+    logger.info("APNS payload %s", orjson.dumps(apns_payload).decode())
```

That way it gets printed in the log as verbatim JSON. Otherwise the byte-string gets encoded the way it would be in Python source code, like `b'…'` — which means that if you try to copy-paste it to use directly, it can get mangled depending on the contents. For example if you send a message whose content is `"`, you get:
`APNS payload: b'{"alert":{"title":"Desdemona","subtitle":"","body":"\\""},"sound":"default","badge":0,"custom":{"zulip":{"server":"192.168.0.113:9991","realm_id":2,"realm_uri":"http://192.168.0.113:9991","realm_url":"http://192.168.0.113:9991","realm_name":"Zulip Dev","user_id":11,"sender_id":9,"sender_email":"user9@zulipdev.com","time":1746576414,"recipient_type":"private","message_ids":[104]}}}'`

with `"\\""` , which fails to parse as JSON.

        "time": 1740533641,
        "recipient_type": "private",
        "pm_users": "11,12,13",
        "message_ids": [
            17
        ]
    }
}
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>Payload: stream.json</summary>

```json
{
    "aps": {
        "alert": {
            "title": "#devel > plotter",
            "subtitle": "Desdemona:",
            "body": "Despite the fact that such a claim at first glance seems counterintuitive, it is derived from known results. Electrical engineering follows a cycle of four phases: location, refinement, visualization, and evaluation."
        },
        "sound": "default",
        "badge": 0,
    },
    "zulip": {
        "server": "zulipdev.com:9991",
        "realm_id": 2,
        "realm_uri": "http://localhost:9991",
        "realm_url": "http://localhost:9991",
        "realm_name": "Zulip Dev",
        "user_id": 11,
        "sender_id": 9,
        "sender_email": "user9@zulipdev.com",
        "time": 1740558997,
        "recipient_type": "stream",
        "stream": "devel",
        "stream_id": 11,
        "topic": "plotter",
        "message_ids": [
            40
        ]
    }
}
```

</details>

> To receive a notification on the iOS Simulator, we need to push

Reviewer: Now that I've gotten the full instructions working end to end for me and then scanned back through them, I think the structure of what the reader is intended to do here can be expressed more clearly with a bit of reordering:
* First, a `##` section consisting of the steps from here to the end.

  This is the main thing the document is saying to do — everything else is optional, and/or only needs to be done occasionally before then doing this portion many times.
* Then, a `##` section with the three pre-canned payloads, i.e. the portion of Step 6 above this point.
* Then, a third `##` section describing how to produce new canned payloads. That consists of Steps 1–5, with each one adjusted to a `###`-level section instead of `##`-level so that it's a sub-section of this overall section.

Then the structure is: you do what's in the first section. To get input to use in that, you can use either the second section or the third section.

And then in particular the individual steps of the third section don't get labeled as optional; they're all required if you want to produce payloads. So this structure makes that relationship clearer, whereas the individual "optional" labels look as if they're saying one might pick and choose.
